Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
3
1.1
Digestive System
Human digestive system consists of the alimentary canal and the associated
glands.
1.1.1 Alimentary canal/digestive tract
The alimentary canal of man begins with the  anterior opening, the mouth,
and ends with the posterior opening, the anus. Parts of the alimentary
canal between the mouth and the anus include buccal cavity, pharynx,
oesophagus, stomach, small intestine and the large intestine in the
given order.
Pancreas
Jejunum
Ascending colon
Transverse colon
Duodenum
Gall bladder
Liver
Ileum
Caecum
Vermiform appendix
Anus
Rectum
Descending colon
Oral cavity
Mouth
Submaxillary and
sublingual glands
Parotid gland
Pharynx
Oesophagus
Stomach
Figure 1.1  The human digestive system
Zoology
4
I.  Mouth and Buccal (oral) cavity
The mouth, bordered by the movable upper and lower lips (labia), leads into
the buccal or oral cavity.  The palate separates the ventral buccal cavity
from the dorsal nasal chamber and facilitates  chewing and breathing
simultaneously. The anterior bony hard palate is lined by palatine rugae.
The posterior soft palate that hangs down into the pharynx is called uvula.
The jawbones bear  four kinds of teeth and a tongue occurs at the base of the
buccal cavity.
i. Teeth
These are ecto-mesodermal in origin.
Teeth of human beings are embedded in
the sockets of the jaw bones, hence called
thecodont. Majority of mammals
including human beings form two sets
of teeth during their life time, a set of
temporary/ milk teeth or deciduous
teeth replaced by a set of permanent
teeth or adult teeth. This type of
dentition is called diphyodont dentition.
An adult human has 32 permanent teeth,
which are of four different types namely,
incisors (I), canines (C), premolars (PM),
and molars (M), and such a type of
dentition is called heterodont dentition.
The arrangement of different types of
teeth in each half of both the jaws in the order I, C, PM, M is represented by
the  dental formula in adult humans is
2
1
2
3
I
C
PM
M
32
2
1
2
3
. The dental
formula of the ‘milk dentition’ of a baby is
teeth. The
third molar teeth appear very late (usually at about  21 years of age ) and are
called wisdom teeth. Incisors, the ‘chisel shaped’ teeth are  useful in cutting,
canines, the  dagger like teeth  help in tearing, premolars and molars, the
cheek teeth, help in grinding the food.
The Structure of a Tooth
Tooth has three parts namely crown (the exposed part), neck (the middle
part) and root (the inner most part embedded in the socket of jaw bone). The
bulk of a tooth is formed by a hard material called dentine, which is secreted
by odontoblasts, of mesodermal origin. Dentine of the crown is covered by
Figure 1.2
Arrangement
of
different
types of teeth in the jaw on
one side and the sockets on
the other side
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
5
enamel  (the hardest substance in
the body), which  is secreted by
ameloblasts of ectodermal origin.
A small cavity present inside the
tooth is called pulp cavity, which
is filled with pulp (odontoblasts,
nerves,blood vessels etc) and lined
by a layer of odontoblasts. Dentine
of the root is covered by cementum.
The root is fixed in the socket
(alveolus) of the jaw bone by
cementum
and
periodontal
membrane. The basal parts  of teeth
(neck and root)  are covered  by the
gums (gingiva).
ii. Tongue
It is a freely movable, muscular sense organ,
attached to the floor of the oral cavity by a fold
of tissue called frenulum. The upper surface of
the tongue has small projections called papillae,
some of which bear taste buds. In humans the
tongue bears 4 types of papillae namely 1. fungi
form (at the anterior margin and tip of tongue),
2. filiform (on the surface of the tongue) and 3.
circumvallate (on the posterior  surface/base
of the tongue) and 4. foliate papillae (on the
lateral sides of posterior 1/3rd of the tongue,
rudimentary in adults). The tongue acts as
‘universal tooth brush’, and helps in mixing
saliva with food, taste detection, deglutition and
speaking.
II. Pharynx
The oral cavity leads into a short pharynx which serves as a common passage
for food and air. It is divided into nasopharynx (lies above the soft palate),
oropharynx (the middle part) and laryngopharynx (the lower part). The
trachea opens into the larynx and from there into the laryngopharynx through
the glottis. A cartilaginous flap called epiglottis prevents the entry of food
into glottis during swallowing. Pharynx possesses voluntary muscles to assist
in swallowing. Tonsils (lymphoid tissues) present in the pharynx , include
i) pharyngeal tonsils or adenoids, ii) a pair of palatine tonsils and iii) a
pair of lingual tonsils. Eustachian tubes from the middle ear cavities open
into the nasopharynx.
Figure 1.4   Tongue
Circum vallate
papillae
Fungiform
papillae
Filiform
papillae
Figure 1.3  L.S. of tooth
Enamel
Dentine
Nerve
Blood Vessels
Jaw bone
Gum
Pulp cavity
Periodontal
membrane
C
R
O
W
N
N
E
C
K
R
O
O
T
Foliate
papillae
Zoology
6
III. Oesophagus
The oesophagus is a thin long tube which extends posteriorly, passing through
the neck, thorax and diaphragm and it finally leads into the stomach. A
muscular sphincter (gastro-oesophageal/cardiac sphincter) regulates the
opening between the oesophagus and the stomach. There is an upper
oesophageal sphincter at the beginning of the oesophagus.
IV. Stomach
The stomach is a wide, J-shaped,
distensible muscular bag like structure,
located in the upper left portion of the
abdominal cavity just below the diaphragm.
It has three major parts, an anterior
cardiac portion into which the oesophagus
opens, a middle large fundic region (main
body) and a posterior pyloric portion which
opens into the first part of the small
intestine through the pyloric aperture
which is guarded by the pyloric sphincter.
V. Small intestine
The small intestine is the longest part of the alimentary canal. It is
distinguished serially into three regions namely proximal duodenum, middle
long coiled jejunum and distal highly coiled ileum. Duodenum receives the
hepato-pancreatic duct. Ileum opens into the large intestine,and the opening
bears the ilio-caecal valve and a sphincter to prevent backward flow of
faecal matter into the ileum.
VI. Large Intestine
It consists of caecum, colon and rectum. Caecum is a small blind sac which
hosts some symbiotic microorganisms. A narrow finger-like tubular
projection, the vermiform appendix ( abdominal tonsil ) which is a vestigial
organ, arises from the caecum.  The caecum opens into the colon which is
divided into - an ascending, a transverse, a descending parts and a sigmoid
colon that continues behind into the rectum. Colon shows the external
bulged out pouches called haustra and three longitudinal smooth muscle
folds called taenia coli.  Rectum is a small dilated sac which leads into anal
canal that opens out through the anus. It is guarded by an internal anal
sphincter formed by ‘smooth muscle’ and external anal sphincter formed
by a ring of voluntary, striped muscle. There is no significant digestive
activity in the large intestine. It is concerned with the absorption of some
water, minerals and certain drugs. It secretes mucus which helps in keeping the
undigested particles together and lubricating their passage to the exterior.
Figure 1.5
Anatomical regions of
human stomach
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
7
Histology of alimentary canal
The wall of the alimentary canal
from the oesophagus to the
rectum possesses four layers
namely serosa, muscularis
externa, sub mucosa and
mucosa.
i) Serosa: it is the outermost
layer and  is made up of a thin
mesothelium
with
some
connective tissue.   ii) Muscularis
externa: It is formed by smooth
muscles usually arranged into
outer longitudinal and inner
circular muscles. An oblique
muscle layer may be present in
some regions such as stomach, iii) Sub mucosa: It is formed of loose
connective tissue containing nerves, blood vessels and lymph vessels. Sub
mucosa of duodenum has Brunner’s glands which secrete  mucus, iv) Mucosa:
It is the innermost layer lining the lumen of the alimentary canal. Mucosa
of the stomach forms irregular folds called gastric rugae in between which
there are many microscopic gastric glands. The mucosa of the small intestine
forms small folds called villi. The columnar epithelial cells that line the villi
produce numerous microscopic projections called microvilli giving a ‘brush
border’ appearance. These modifications increase the surface area of
absorption. Plasma membrane of
microvilli bears enzymes such as
disaccharidases,which are called ‘brush
border enzymes’. Each villus has a
network of capillaries and a large lymph
capillary called lacteal. Mucosal
epithelium has goblet cells which
secrete mucus, that helps in the
protection of the wall from the action of
the enzymes. It also helps in the
lubrication of the passage of food.
Mucosa of the small intestine forms
crypts of Lieberkuhn between the bases
of villi.
Figure 1.6 Diagrammatic representation of
transverse section of gut
Muscle layers:
Figure 1.7
A section of small intestinal
mucosa showing villi
Zoology
8
1.1.2 Digestive glands
The digestive glands present in the wall of the alimentary canal are gastric
glands, Brunner’s glands, and crypts of Lieberkuhn. The salivary glands,
liver and pancreas are the digestive glands associated with the gut (extra
alimentary canal glands).
I. Salivary glands
There are three pairs of salivary glands in man, the parotid glands (present
below the pinna/inner surface of the cheeks), the sub maxillary/sub
mandibular glands (angles of lower jaw) and the sublingual glands(below
the tongue). These are formed of serous cells and mucous cells which secrete
saliva. Saliva contains water, salts, mucin, the enzyme ptyalin or salivary
amylase (
-amylase) and lysozyme (which kills bacteria). The pH of saliva
is 6.8.
Note: Mumps, a painful inflammation of the parotid salivary glands is
caused by a virus of the group ‘Paramyxovirus’.
II. Gastric glands
These are located in the wall of the stomach beneath the surface epithelium.
Gastric glands are of three types namely: i) Cardiac glands (secrete mucus
for protection), ii) Pyloric glands (secrete mucus and the hormone ‘gastrin’)
and iii) Fundic/Oxyntic glands (They are composed of three different types
of cells, the mucous neck cells which secrete mainly mucus; the peptic/
chief cells which secrete large quantities of the ‘proenzymes’ pepsinogen,
prorennin and the oxyntic/parietal cells which secrete hydrochloric acid
and Castle’s Intrinsic Factor (essential for the absorption of vitamin B12).
Secretions of all these glands form the ‘gastric juice’ with the pH ranging
from 0.9 to 1.8.  Chief cells of gastric glands also secrete some amount of
gastric lipase.
III. Intestinal glands
They are of two types, i) Brunner’s glands (secrete mucus), ii) Crypts of
Lieberkuhn. The secretion of Brunner’s glands along with that of crypts of
Lieberkuhn constitutes the intestinal juice or succus entericus, with  the
pH ranging from 7.5 to 8.0. Succus entericus contains peptidases such as
tripeptidases, dipeptidases, aminopeptidases and disaccharidases such
as sucrase (invertase), maltase, and lactase. It also has small amounts of
intestinal lipase and the enzyme activator enterokinase. Paneth  cells
lining the bases of the intestinal glands secrete lysozyme which kills the
bacteria that escape destruction in the stomach.
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
9
Hepatic ducts
NOTE: The intestinal wall has some ‘stem cells’ which play an important
role in renewing the epithelial cells lost in the intestinal epithelium.
The  Paneth cells are believed to play an important role in the protection
of those cells .
IV. Liver
Liver is the largest gland
of the body weighing about
1.2 to 1.5 kg. in an adult
human. It is situated in
the abdominal cavity, just
below
the
diaphragm
towards the right side and
has two lobes. Each liver
lobe is formed of hexagonal
hepatic
lobules,
surrounded by a thin
connective tissue sheath
called
the
Glisson’s
capsule.
The
hepatic
lobules are the structural
and the functional units
of the liver, containing hepatic
cells arranged in the form
hepatic cords present around a
central vein. The bile secreted by
hepatic cells passes through the
hepatic ducts and is stored and
concentrated in a thin muscular
sac called the gall bladder. The
duct of the gall bladder (cystic
duct) along with the common
hepatic duct  from the liver forms
the common bile duct (CBD). The
CBD is joined by the pancreatic
duct to form the ampulla of
Vater. Its opening into the
duodenum is guarded by the
sphincter of Oddi.
Central vein
Sinusoids
Hepatocytes
Branch of hepatic
portal vein
Branch of hepatic
artery
Bile canaliculi
Figure 1.9 Components of a hepatic lobule
Hepatic cords
Figure 1.8  The duct system of liver, gall bladder and pancreas
Zoology
10
Do You Know: The pancreatic duct and the common bile duct unite to
form the ampulla of Vater/Hepatopancreatic ampulla.
Functions of the liver
Liver performs a variety of functions such as synthesis, storage and secretion of various
substances. There are as follows:
1.
Liver secretes bile juice (yellowish-green in colour). It does not contain
enzymes, but it contains bile salts such as glycocholates and
taurocholates of sodium and potassium and bile pigments the
bilirubin and biliverdin  (formed by the breakdown of hemoglobin of the
old RBC destroyed in the body).
2.
Liver plays the ‘key role’ in carbohydrate metabolism (glycogenesis,
glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis and lipogenesis).
3.
Liver also plays a role in lipid metabolism (synthesis of cholesterol and
production of triglycerides).
4.
Deamination of proteins (removal of NH2 group from the amino acids)
and conversion of ammonia into to urea (via the ornithine cycle).
5.
The lactic acid formed during anaerobic muscle contraction is converted
into glucose via pyruvates (gluconeogenesis) in the liver by Cori cycle.
6.
Liver is the chief organ of detoxification of toxic substances that enter
the gut along with food.
NOTE: Liver is the ‘first check post’ that bars entry of toxins into general
circulation. Recall the role of the smooth ER in detoxification of toxins.
The toxins that enter the body through food and water reach the liver
via the hepatic portal vein, where they are detoxified. In the case of
alcoholics, liver detoxifies alcohol to some extent before it is sent into
general circulation. That is why liver is the first and most affected
organ in chronic alcoholism (cirrhosis). This is the reason behind
development of liver cancers by certain fungal toxins, produced by
organisms such as Aspergillus flavus. After entering the body, the
‘aflatoxins’ are generally metabolized by the liver into some other non-
toxic/ less toxic substances.
7.
Liver acts as thermoregulatory organ (like skeletal muscle, liver too
takes part in thermogenesis as it has high glucose (in the form of glycogen)
at its disposal).
8.
Liver acts as a haemopoietic organ in the foetus and erythroclastic
organ in the adult (along with the spleen).
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
11
9.
The liver synthesizes the plasma proteins such as albumins, globulins,
blood clotting factors such as fibrinogen, prothrombin, etc. and the
anticoagulant, called heparin.
10.
Kupffer cells are the large phagocytic cells which  remove unwanted
substances and microbes that attack the liver by phagocytosis. They
are present in the sinusoids that lie in between hepatic cords and they
are also called hepatic macrophages.
V.  Pancreas (Sweet gland / Mixed gland / Heterocrine gland)
The pancreas is the second largest gland in human body. It is a mixed
(compound) gland situated between the limbs of ‘U’ shaped duodenum.
Exocrine part of pancreas, the pancreatic acini secrete an alkaline pancreatic
juice (pH 8.4) containing enzymes and the endocrine part, the islets of
Langerhans which secrete insulin, glucagon and other hormones. Pancreatic
Juice contains sodium bicarbonate, trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen,
carboxypeptidase, pancreatic lipase (steapsin), pancreatic amylase and
nucleases such as DNAase and RNAase.
1.1.3  Physiology of digestion
Digestion is the process of conversion of complex non--diffusible food
substances into simple diffusible forms. The process of digestion is
accomplished by mechanical (cutting and chewing of food by teeth and
churning of food by peristalsis) and chemical (enzymatic reactions by
hydrolysing enzymes)processes.
I.  Digestion in the buccal cavity
Buccal cavity performs two major functions, mastication of food and
facilitation of swallowing (deglutition). Teeth and tongue with the help of
saliva masticate and mix up the food thoroughly. Mucus in saliva helps in
lubricating and adhering the masticated food particles into a bolus. The
saliva secreted into oral cavity contains electrolytes such as Na+, K+, Cl–,
HCO3
– and enzymes, such as salivary amylase (ptyalin) and lysozyme.
The chemical process of digestion is initiated in the oral cavity (buccal
cavity) by the hydrolytic action of carbohydrate (starch) splitting enzyme,
the salivary amylase. About 30% of starch is hydrolyzed here into a
disaccharide called maltose by the enzyme ptyalin. Lysozyme present in
the saliva acts as an antibacterial agent that prevents infections.
Starch
Maltose
Salivary amylase
pH 6.8
Zoology
12
II. Digestion in the stomach
The stomach stores food for 4-5 hours. The food is mixed thoroughly with the
acidic gastric juice of the stomach by the churning movements of its muscular
wall and the product is called chyme. The mucus and bicarbonates present
in the gastric juice play an important role in the lubrication and protection of
the mucosal epithelium from ‘excoriation’ by the highly concentrated
hydrochloric acid. HCl provides the acidic pH (1.8) which is optimal for the
action of pepsin. It also kills the microorganisms ingested along with food.
The proenzymes of gastric juice, the pepsinogen and prorennin, on exposure
to hydrochloric acid are converted into the active enzymes, pepsin and rennin,
respectively. Pepsin can convert pepsinogen into pepsin (autocatalysis). Pepsin
converts proteins into proteoses and peptones. Rennin is a proteolytic
enzyme found in the gastric juice of infants. It acts on the milk protein, the
casein in the presence of calcium ions and converts it into calcium
paracaseinate (curdling of milk) and proteoses. Pepsin acts on calcium
paracaseinate and converts it into peptones. Proteoses are a group of
compounds formed during protein digestion and they are more complex
than peptones. Certain other cells  in the wall of the stomach
produce bicarbonate, a base, to buffer the acidic contents of the stomach.
They also prevent too much acidity in the stomach.  The  mucus produced by
the wall of the stomach forms a physical barrier to prevent HCl  from damaging
the wall of the stomach.
Prorennin (inactive)
Calciumparacaseinate
Proteins
Pepsinogen (inactive)
Casein
Rennin (active)
Peptones
Proteoses + Peptones
Pepsin (active)
Calciumparacaseinate
Hcl
Pepsin
Pepsin
Hcl
Rennin
Ca
+2
III.  Digestion in the small intestine
Various types of movements are generated by the muscularis externa layer
of the small intestine. These movements help in thorough mixing up of the
food with bile, pancreatic juice and intestinal juice in the intestine and
thereby facilitate digestion. The mucus along with the bicarbonates from
pancreas protects the intestinal mucosa from the acidic medium and provides
an alkaline medium (pH7.8) for enzymatic activities. The duodenal cells of
the proximal part also  produce large amounts of bicarbonate to completely
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
13
neutralize any gastric acid that passes further down into the digestive tract.
All the enzymes of the pancreatic juice and succus entericus (mentioned
above) act only in alkaline medium.
i. Digestion of proteins
Trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen and procarboxy peptidases are inactive
enzymes. Trypsinogen is activated by the enzyme, enterokinase, secreted
by the intestinal mucosa into active trypsin, which in turn activates the
other enzymes in the pancreatic juice. Trypsin itself can similarly activate
trypsinogen into trypsin (autocatalysis).
Trypsinogen
Trypsinogen
Chymotrypsinogen
Trypsin
Trypsin (Autocatalysis)
Chymotrypsin
Enterokinase
Trypsin
Trypsin
Proteins, proteoses and peptones (partly hydrolysed proteins) in the chyme, reaching
the intestine are acted upon by the proteolytic enzymes of the pancreatic juice and
intestinal juice as shown below:
Proteins
Proteoses
Peptones
Trypsin/Cymotrypsin
Carboxypeptidase, aminopeptidase
Tripeptides + Dipeptides
Tripeptides
Dipeptides + Amino acids
Dipeptides
Amino acids
Trypeptidase
Dipeptidase
Thus the end products of digestion of proteins namely amino acids are formed
in the small intestine.
ii. Digestion of fats
Bile salts  of the bile help in the emulsification of fats i.e. break down of fats
into very small micelles. Bile also activates lipases of pancreatic juice
(steapsin) and intestinal lipases. These lipases act on emulsified fats and
convert them into fatty acids and glycerols.
Emulsified fats
Fats
Monoglycerides
Diglycerides
Monoglycerides
Emulsified fats
Fatty acids + Glycerol
Lipases
Lipases
Bile salts
Lipases
Tripeptidase
Zoology
14
iii. Digestion of Carbohydrates
Starch (Carbohydrates) in the chyme are hydrolysed by the pancreatic amylase
into disaccharides. Intestinal disaccharidases act on the ‘disaccharides’
and convert them into monosaccharides.
iv. Digestion of nucleic acids
Nucleases (DNAase, RNAase) of the pancreatic juice act on the nucleic acids
to form nucleotides and nucleosides. Nucleotidases and nucleosidases of
the intestinal juice covert the nucleotides and nucleosides into pentose sugars
and nitrogen bases.
Nucleotides
Nucleicacides (DNA, RNA)
Nucleosides
Nucleosides + Phosphates
Nucleotides
Sugars + Bases
Nucleotidease
Nucleases
Nucleosidases
1.1.4 Peristalsis
It involves contraction and relaxation of smooth muscles of the wall of the
gut, resulting in successive wave like movements throughout the gut. It
causes propulsion of food through different parts of the gut and its exposure
to efficient enzymatic action. The bolus of food formed in the buccal cavity
is conveyed into pharynx and then into the  oesophagus by swallowing or
deglutition. The  bolus further passes down through the oesophagus by
successive waves of muscular contractions called peristalsis. Usually
peristaltic movements are initiated from the oesophagus and are continued
up to the rectum. However the sphincters associated with the gut regulate
the passage of food through different parts of the gut. Peristaltic movements
of the stomach (churning movements) are so powerful that they can cause
mechanical digestion. Peristaltic movements of the intestine are slow.
Stimulation from the parasympathetic nervous system   increases the
peristaltic movements of the gut and relaxes  the sphincters (made of smooth
muscles).
DNAase,RNAase
Nucleic acids
Starch
Galactose
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
15
1.1.5 Absorption of digested food
Absorption is the process by which the end products of digestion  pass through
the intestinal mucosa into blood or lymph. It is carried out by passive,
active or facilitated transport mechanisms. Monosaccharides such as
glucose and galactose are transported into the cells of the villi via secondary
active transport (SAT), coupled with Na+ and from there into blood by
Facilitated Diffusion. Substances such as fructose is absorbed by Facilitated
Diffusion. From the intestinal epithelial cells, it is transported into blood by
FD. Transport of water depends upon the osmotic gradient. Amino acids
are actively transported or by Secondary Active Transport with Na+ and from
there they enter blood capillaries by FD. Short chain fatty acids ‘diffuse’ into
the intestinal epithelial cells and blood capillaries.
Long chain fatty acids and glycerol, being insoluble in water cannot be
absorbed into the blood directly.  They are first modified  into small droplets
called micelles, which enter the intestinal mucosal cells by diffusion. In the
intestinal epithelial cells they are formed into very small protein coated fat
globules called chylomicrons. These chylomicrons are transported into the
lacteals (lymph capillaries) in the villi by exocytosis (they cannot enter the
blood capillaries due to their large size). The lymph vessels ultimately release
the absorbed substances into the blood stream through the left subclavian
vein via the thoracic duct. These chylomicrons (triglycerides) are broken
down to fatty acids and glycerol by the action of  the enzyme ‘lipoprotein
lipase’ present in   the endothelial walls and  they diffuse into the adipocytes
of the adipose tissue, and liver for storage (as neutral fat / tissue fat).
Vitamins
are
generally
absorbed
by
simple
diffusion.
Vitamin B12 is actively reabsorbed in combination with Castle’s Intrinsic
Factor.
Absorption of substances takes place in different parts of the gut, like mouth,
stomach, small intestine and large intestine. However maximum absorption
of the end products of digestion occurs in the small intestine.
Summary of absorption of different parts of digestive system
Mouth
Certain drugs coming
in contact with the
mucosa of mouth and
lower side of the
tongue are
absorbed in to
the blood
capillaries lining
them.
Stomach
Absorption
of
water,
simple
sugars,
and
alcohol, drugs
etc.,
takes
place.
Small intestine
Principal organ for the absorption of
nutrients. The digestion is completed
here and the final (end) products of
digestion such as glucose, fructose,
galactose, amino acids are absorbed
into blood through mucosa whereas fatty
acids and glycerol are absorbed through
the mucosa into lymph of the lacteals.
Large Intestine
Absorption of water, some
minerals and drugs takes
place.
Zoology
16
Assimilation
The absorbed substances finally reach the tissues where food materials
become integral components of the living protoplasm and are used for the
production of energy, growth and repair. This process is called assimilation.
Defaecation
The undigested, unabsorbed substances are passed on to the large intestine.
No significant digestive activity occurs in the large intestine. The functions
of large intestine are 1. Absorption of some water, minerals and certain drugs. 2.
Secretion of mucus which helps in holding the undigested particles together and
lubricating it for easy passage. The undigested, unabsorbed substances which mostly
include fibre of plant material generally called roughage enter the large intestine. Water
and some useful substances are reabsorbed in it. It is temporarily stored in the rectum
till it is expelled out through the anus (defaecation).
The undigested wastes, solidified into faeces in the rectum, initiate a neural reflex
causing an urge for its removal. The egestion of faeces to the outside through the anal
opening is a voluntary process and it is carried out by a ‘mass peristaltic
movement’ (forcible peristaltic movements that expel the contents of the
large intestine).
1.1.6 Gastro Intestinal hormones
Activities of the gastrointestinal tract are under neural and hormonal control
for proper coordination of different parts. The sight, smell and the presence
of food in the oral cavity can stimulate the secretions of saliva. Gastric and
intestinal secretions are also similarly stimulated by neural signals. The
muscular activities of different parts of the alimentary canal are also
moderated by neural mechanisms. Hormonal control of the secretions of
digestive juices is carried out by the ‘local hormones’ by gastric and intestinal
mucosa as given below.
Gastrin is secreted from the epithelium of the stomach; it stimulates the
secretions of hydrochloric acid and pepsinogen.
Enterogastrone or gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP) is secreted by the
epithelium of duodenum due to the effect of dietary lipids. It inhibits gastric
acidity and gastro-intestinal motility.
Secretin is secreted by the epithelium of duodenum and acts on the pancreatic
acini; stimulates  the secretions of water and bicarbonates of the  pancreatic
juice.
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
17
Cholecystokinin (CCK)/Pancreozymin: It is secreted from the epithelium
of the duodenum; acts on pancreas and gall bladder and stimulate the
secretion of pancreatic enzymes and release of bile, respectively.
Enterocrinin secreted from the duodenal mucosa stimulates the secretions of
succus entericus, villikinin secreted from intestinal villi, stimulates the movement
of villi to increase absorption.
Calorific values of carbohydrates, proteins and fats
The oxidation of one gram of proteins and carbohydrates yield almost
the same amount of energy i.e.4.0 K cal, whereas it is 9.0 K cal in the
case of fats.
1.1.7 Nutritional disorders
1.
Protein energy Malnutrition (PEM) [Kwashiorkor] :  Kwashiorkor is a
disease caused due to deficiency of proteins in diet. The main symptom
of this disease is the accumulation of fluid in intercullular spaces of
tissues of body.  As a result body shows oedema, hands, legs, face show
swelling, skin becomes dry.  The patient suffers from diarrhoea.
2.
Indigestion: In this condition, the food is not properly digested leading
to a feeling of ‘fullness’. The causes of indigestion are mostly ‘spicy
foods’, ‘over eating’ and ‘anxiety’.
3.
Vomiting: It is the ‘throwing out’ of the contents of the stomach through
the mouth. This reflex action is controlled by the ‘vomiting centre’ in
the medulla oblongata. A feeling of nausea precedes vomiting.
4.
Jaundice:  The liver is affected (hepatitis); anorexia (lack of appetite) is
a common symptom. Skin and the white part of the eye balls  turn
yellow due to deposition of bile pigments.
5.
Diarrhoea: The abnormal frequency of bowl movement and increased
liquidity of the faecal discharge is known as diarrhoea. It reduces the
absorption of food and results in loss of water (dehydration).
Constipation: In constipation, the faeces are retained within the rectum
as it  is hard due to low content of water and the movement of the bowel
occurs irregularly.
6.
Marasmus: This disease is caused due to deficiency of proteins and
calories.  It is observed in children born without sufficient interval.
The child appears weak and surrers from swelling of joints, deficiency
in development of muscles, dry skin, diarrhoea etc.
Zoology
18
Adenoids: A mass of lymphoid tissue
present in the nasopharynx, also
called pharyngeal tonsil.
Ameloblasts: The epidermal cell that
secrete the enamel of teeth.
Brunner’s glands: Intestinal glands
of the sub mucosa of the
duodenum; secrete mucus.
Castle’s intrinsic factor: It is
secreted from the oxyntic cells of
the stomach, and promotes the
absorption of the vitamin B12 in the
intestine.
Chyme: Partly digested acidic food
formed in the stomach.
Crypts of Lieberkuhn: They are the
‘tubular invaginations of the
intestinal epithelium around the
villi/   Intestinal glands of the
mucosa of the  ileum; secrete
intestinal juice.
Cystic duct: Duct that arises from
the gall bladder and joins the
hepatic duct to form the common
bile duct in liver.
Deamination: Removal of ammono
group from amino acids during
their metabolism (the amino group
is used in the formation of
ammonia) in liver.
Deciduous/milk teeth: A set of
temporary teeth that are formed as
the first set, they don’t include
premolar and last molars in man.
Glycogenesis: Conversion of excess
glucose into glycogen in liver.
Glycogenolysis: Conversion of
glycogen (animal starch) into
glucose
Gluconeogensis: Synthesis of
glucose from non-carbohydrates
such as proteins and lipids.
Lacteals: L ymph capillaries of
intestinal villi, help in the
absorption of fats and fat soluble
vitamins into lymph.
Lipogenesis: Conversion of excess
carbohydrates and proteins into
lipids and it occurs in liver.
Odontoblasts: Dentine producing cells
of teeth.
Ornithine cycle: The synthesis of
urea from ammonia and CO2, which
involves
ornithine,citruline,
arginine and the enzyme arginase.
Oxyntic cells: Cells of fundic glands
of
the
stomach;
secrete
hydrochloric acid and Castle’s
intrinsic factor.
Parotid glands: The largest of the
salivary glands of man, present
below the pinnae on the inner
surface of the cheeks.
Peptic ells: These are the chief cells;
secrete pepsinogen and prorennin.
Periodontal membrane: It is a layer
of dense irregular connective tissue
that lines the sockets of the  jaw
bones ;   fixes the   root  of  a tooth
in  the  alveolus of  the  jaw bone.
Sphincter of Oddi: A sphincter which
guards the opening of the hepato-
pancreatic
duct
into
the
duodenum.
Succus entericus: Intestinal juice
secreted by both Brunner’s glands
and crypts of Lieberkuhn of the
intestine.
Thecodont teeth: Teeth embedded in
the sockets of jaw bone. e.g.
mammals and crocodiles.
Vermiform appendix: A narrow finger
like tubular projection, that arises
from the caecum of man; it is a
vestigial  organ in  man.
GLOSSARY
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
19
1.
Give the dental formula of adult
human beings.
2.
Bile juice contains no digestive
enzymes, yet it is important for
digestion. How?
3.
Describe the role of chymotrypsin.
Name two other digestive enzymes
of the same category and secreted
by the same gland.
4.
What would happen if, HCl were
not secreted in the stomach?
5.
Explain the terms thecodont and
diphyodont dentitions.
6.
What is auto catalysis? Give two
examples.
7.
What is chyme?
8.
Name the different types of salivary
glands of man, and their locations
in the human body.
9.
Name different types of papillae
present on the tongue of man.
10. What is the hardest substance in
the human body? What is its
origin?
11. Name the structure of gut which
is vestigial in human beings, but
well developed in the herbivores
.And mention the type of tissue
with which it is mostly formed.
12. Distinguish between deglutition
and mastication
13. Distinguish between diarrhoea
and constipation.
14. Name two hormones secreted by
the duodenal mucosa.
15. Distinguish between absorption
and assimilation
QUESTIONS
1.
Draw a neat labelled diagram of
L.S. of a tooth.
2.
Describe the process of digestion
of proteins in the stomach.
3.
Explain the role of pancreatic
Juice in the digestion of
proteins.
4.
How are polysaccharides and
disaccharides digested?
5.
If, you take butter in your food,
how does it get digested and
absorbed in the body? Explain.
6.
What are the functions of liver?
Short Answer Type Questions
Long Answer Type Questions
1.
Describe the physiology of
digestion of various types
of food in the human digestive
system.
2 .
Explain the digestive system
of man with neat labelled
diagrams.
Very Short Answer Type
Questions
Zoology
20
Digestion and Absorption
1.
Regarding the length of the alimentary canal in animals, in general-which type of
animals possess a long alimentary canal and which possess a comparatively  short
alimentary canal? Can you give one example of a vertebrate which possesses a long
alimentary canal in some stage of the life history and a relatively short alimentary
canal in another stage. HINT: you probably heard of such animal in your school biology
lessons.
2.
Alcohol is harmful to the body. It gets directly absorbed into blood through the wall of
the gut, as it does not require any digestion. In such a case will there be any difference
between drinking alcohol (without diluting it with water) and injecting alcohol into
blood directly through a vein? If you think there is a difference, what is it?.
3.
Saliva is an important constituent of the human digestive process. Simultaneously,
can your saliva be a part of any other important system in your body ? If so what is the
system. HINT: Recall all the enzymes present in saliva.
4.
If, 100 molecules each of glucose and fructose are required, hypothetically, from lactose
and sucrose , how many molecules of ‘invertase’ and ‘lactase’ are required, respectively
? (CONDITION:  You must use both the enzymes and hypothetically consider one molecule
of enzyme working on one molecule of the substrate only).
5.
We say that fats cannot be absorbed into blood directly, because of their larger molecular
size and that they enter circulation through the lymph system. If so, when blood reaches
tissues how do these fats pass into the tissues through the walls of the blood capillaries?
6.
If you eat a piece of meat, it gets digested in the lumen of the gut, due to the activity of
various enzymes. Can you guess why the same enzymes, do not digest the wall of your
gut or the cells they are produced by , which are equivalent to the piece of meat eaten.
HINT : You have a clue somewhere in this exercise / questionnaire .
7.
Why are certain amino acids and fatty acids called ‘essential amino acids’ and ‘essential
fatty acids’?
8.
Hypothetically, if more ammonia and CO2 are injected into the blood in the HPV, what
substance can be expected to be present in more quantity in the blood sample collected
from the hepatic vein of the same person.
9.
Presuming the microbial content of the blood sample from the HPV as 10,000 per cubic
millimeter, what in your opinion will be the microbial content of blood sample taken
from the hepatic vein? Will it be more/ less/ same ?  Give reason(s).
10. The food we ingest contains potentially harmful toxins, which can cause serious
consequences. One organ acts as a ‘Guardian Angel’ acting as a barrier and protecting
other body parts from the  ill effects to a lesser or greater extent. What is the name
of the  organ?
FOR IGNITED
MINDS
The ‘Fuel Provider’
and ‘Life Sustainer’
n
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
21
Breathing and
Exchange of Gases
UNIT I B
1.2
Breathing and
Exchange of Gases
Respiratory system -
Your ‘Calorie Burner’ and ‘Energy Provider’
Respiration is a catabolic process of release of energy mostly by the
oxidation of foods. Oxygen obtained from the surrouding medium is utilised
in the production of ‘metabolic water’, an end product of the ‘burning
of calories’. The direction of flow of blood in the gills and the
direction of flow of water are in ‘counter current flow’ mechanism,
for efficient ‘oxygenation’ of blood. Birds have developed a technique
of continuous exchange of gases even during expiration, with the help of
a unique feature - the presence of ‘air sacs’ and ‘parabronchi’.
Insects and some other arthropods supply oxygen directly to each cell via
the tracheae and tracheoles. Thus every cell can virtually receive
oxygen directly, making the ‘tracheate animals’ very active.
At a height of about 6000 m the pO2 becomes almost half of what it is at
the mean sea level, hence the ‘mountain sickness’ in people ascending
mountains. The ‘ribcage’ and the ‘diaphragm’ help mammals breathe in air
more effectively. Homeostasis of oxygen and carbon dioxide are under the
control of the respiratory centre. Inhalation and exhalation are under
the control of the medulla oblongata. There is a pneumotaxic centre
in the  pons and it controls the rate and depth of breathing. Man
cannot hold his breath for long. He is forced to breathe in. Elephant
seal, a mammal can remain under water for up to two hours. The muscles
of the elephant seal and some other aquatic mammals, contains myoglobin
(muscle haemoglobin) which has more affinity for oxygen.
Zoology
22
All living cells need constant supply of energy in order to carryout various
metabolic activities. Energy is produced by the oxidation of micromolecules
of digested food such as glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids. These are
transported to the body cells through the circulatory system. Oxygen is
utilized by organisms to breakdown stored food materials  such as   glucose,
fatty acids etc.  Carbon dioxide  which is harmful (dissolves in water to form
carbonic acid, which lowers the pH of blood threatening homeostasis) is also
released during the above catabolic reactions. It is therefore, evident that O2
has to be continuously provided to the body  cells and CO2 produced by the
cells has to be sent out. Respiration is a vital feature of life. The process of
exchange of O2 from the medium (air or water) with CO2 produced by the cells at
the same time is called ‘breathing’ (Ref: NCERT Vol I, Page 268). However, the
process of respiration, during which air is inhaled into the lungs and exhaled
out of the lungs  is called ‘breathing’. Many authors described the process of
gaseous exchange as ‘external respiration’ or ‘ventilation’ because it
emphasizes that the entry of oxygen and the exit of CO2 happen at places
other than the energy releasing sites. More accurately the “processes leading
to, and including the chemical breakdown of food materials to provide
energy for life is called respiration.” As the chemical breakdown of the
nutrients occurs inside the living cells of every organism, it is called internal
respiration  or cellular respiration.
Anaerobic respiration is the incomplete break down of organic molecules
with less yield of energy; it takes place in the absence of oxygen in organisms
such as yeast and bacteria, muscles(under certain conditions)  etc.
C6H12O6 2CO2+ 2C2H5OH(ethanol)+2ATP
C6H12O6 2C3H6O3(lactic acid)+2ATP
Aerobic (requiring oxygen) respiration yields more energy (gradually) due
to complete breakdown of organic molecules, utilising oxygen.
C6H12O6+6H2O+6O2  6CO2+12H2O+36ATP
1.2.1 Respiratory organs in animals
Mechanisms of breathing vary among different groups of animals depending
mainly on their habitats and levels of organisation. Protozoans and lower
invertebrates such as the sponges, cnidarians, flatworms, etc., exchange
with by simple diffusion over their entire body surface. Earthworms use
their moist body wall; insects have a network of tubes (tracheal system) to
transport atmospheric air with in the body. Spiders and scorpions have
book lungs for aerial respiration. Special vascular structures called gills
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
23
are used by most of the aquatic arthropods and molluscs, whereas vascular
bags called lungs are used by terrestrial forms for the exchange of gases.
Among vertebrates’ fishes, larvae of amphibians and some adult urodeles
use gills, where as the reptiles, birds and mammals respire through lungs.
Amphibians like frogs respire through their moist skin and lungs also.
Mammals have a well developed respiratory system.
1.2.2 Human Respiratory System
Respiratory system of man includes the following:
I.
External nostrils (External Nares)
A pair of external nostrils opens out above the upper lip. They lead into
nasal chambers.
II.
Nasal Chambers
They lie above the palate and are separated from each other by a nasal
septum. Each nasal chamber can be differentiated into three parts namely;
i. vestibular part (which has hair and sebaceous glands to prevent the
entry of dust particles),ii. respiratory part (which is involved in the
conditioning the temperature of inhaled air; it is supported by three thin,
twisted bony plates called turbinals /conchae) and iii.olfactory part (which
is lined by an olfactory epithelium to detect sense of smell).
III.
Naso-pharynx
Nasal chambers lead into nasopharynx through a pair of internal nostrils,
located above the soft palate. Nasopharynx is the upper portion of the pharynx.
IV.
Larynx
Larynx is a cartilaginous box which helps in sound production, hence called
the voice box. Wall of the larynx is supported by nine cartilages. Thyroid,
cricoid and epiglottis are the unpaired cartilages, whereas corniculate
cartilages (cartilages of Santorini - two small conical nodules of
elastic cartilage articulating  with the arytenoid cartilages), arytenoids, and
cuneiform cartilages  are the paired cartilages. Epiglottis is a thin leaf like
elastic cartilaginous flap attached to the thyroid cartilage to prevent the entry
of food into the larynx through the glottis. The yellow elastic fibres which
connect the thyroid and arytenoid cartilages are called vocal cords/vocal
folds. The opening between the true vocal cords and the arytenoid
cartilages  is called (some sources give a simple difinition- ‘the narrow
opening between the two vocal cords’) rima glottidis.
Zoology
24

The mid ventral part of the thyroid cartilage forms the  laryngeal
prominence called Adam’s apple.

In males, the vocal cords are thicker, longer, and  produce low pitch
voice, where as in women and children the vocal cords are usually
short and produce high pitch voice.
NOTE: Larynx contains two types of vocal cords: the ‘false vocal cords’
are the folds of mucous membrane, which do not have a role in  sound
production, and ‘true vocal cords’ which produce sound.
V.
Trachea
Trachea, the wind pipe is a straight tube extending up to the mid-thoracic
cavity. The wall of the trachea is supported by ‘C’ shaped rings of hyaline
cartilage. These rings are incomplete dorsally and keep the trachea always
open preventing its collapse. Internally the trachea is lined by pseudostratified
ciliated epithelium.
VI.
Bronchi and Bronchioles
On entering the mid thoracic cavity, trachea divides at the level of the fifth
thoracic vertebra into right and left primary bronchi. Each primary bronchus
enters the corresponding lung and divides into secondary bronchi that
further divide into tertiary
bronchi.
Each
tertiary
bronchus divides and re-
divides to form primary,
secondary, tertiary, terminal
and respiratory bronchioles
sequentially.
Each
respiratory
bronchiole
terminates in a cluster of
alveolar ducts which end in
alveolar sacs. Bronchi and
initial
bronchioles
are
supported by incomplete
cartilaginous rings. The
branching
network
of
trachea,
bronchi
and
bronchioles constitute the
‘pulmonary tree’ (an upside
down tree).
Figure 1.10  Structure of a part of a
‘Pulmonary lobule’
Terminal bronchiole
Pulmonary arteriole
Lymphatic vessel
Respiratory bronchiole
Alveolar ducts
Alveolar sacs
Alveoli
Elastic
connective
tissue
Pulmonary
venule
Pulmonary
Capillaries
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
25
VII. Lungs
Lungs occupy the greater part of the thoracic cavity. Lungs are covered by a
double layered pleura, with pleural fluid between them. It reduces friction
on the lung surface. The outer pleural membrane is in close contact with the
thoracic lining whereas the inner pleural membrane is in contact with lung’s
surface. The part starting with external nostrils up to the terminal bronchioles
constitute the conducting part, whereas the alveoli and their ducts form the
respiratory or exchange part of the respiratory system. The conducting part
transports the atmospheric air to the alveoli, clears it from foreign particles,
humidifies and also brings the inhaled  air to the body temperature. Exchange
part is the site of actual diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide between
blood and atmospheric air.
The lungs are situated in the thoracic chamber which is anatomically an
air-tight chamber. It is formed dorsally by the vertebral column, ventrally
the sternum, laterally by ribs and on the lower side by the dome-shaped
diaphragm. The anatomical setup of lungs in the thorax is such that any
change in the volume of thoracic cavity will be reflected in the lung cavity
(pulmonary volume). Such an arrangement is essential for breathing, as the
pulmonary volume cannot be directly altered.
Bronchus
Lung
heart
Diaphragm
Epiglottis
Larynx
Trachea
Cut end of rib
Pleural membranes
Alveoli
Pleural fluid
Bronchiole
Figure 1.11
Diagrammatic view of human respiratory system (Sectional view of the
left lung is also shown)
Zoology
26
Respiration in humans involves the following steps:
i.
Breathing or pulmonary ventilation by which atmospheric air with
21% of O2 is drawn in and alveolar air rich in CO2 is sent out.
ii.
Diffusion of gases across the alveolar membrane
iii.
Transport of gases by blood, between the lungs and tissues.
iv.
Diffusion of O2 and CO2  between the blood in the systemic capillaries
and the tissues.
v.
Utilization of O2 by the cells for catabolic reactions and resultant
production of CO2, H2o, and ATP(Cellular respiration).
1.2.3 Mechanism of Breathing
Breathing is a means of maximising the process of gaseous exchange. The
movement of air into and out of the lungs is carried out by creating a pressure
gradient between the lungs and the atmosphere.
Breathing involves two stages such as inspiration
and expiration. Inspiration can occur if the
pressure within the lungs (Intra-pulmonary
pressure) is less than the atmospheric pressure,
i.e., there is a negative pressure in the lungs with
respect to atmospheric pressure. Similarly,
expiration takes place when the intra-pulmonary
pressure is higher than the atmospheric pressure.
The muscular diaphragm and a specialized set of
muscles, the external and internal inter-costal
muscles help in generating such gradients.
i.
Inspiration: Intake of atmospheric air into the
lungs is called  inspiration. It is an active
process , as it takes place by the contraction
of the muscles of the diaphragm and the
external inter-costal muscles, which extend
in between the ribs. The contraction of the
diaphragm (phrenic muscles) increases the
volume of the thoracic chamber in the antero-
posterior axis. The contraction of external
inter-costal muscles lifts up the ribs and
sternum causing an increase in the volume
of the thoracic chamber in the dorso-ventral
axis. The overall increase in the thoracic
volume causes a similar increase in the
‘pulmonary volume’. An increase in the pulmonary
volume decreases the intra-pulmonary pressure
to less than that of the atmosphere, which forces
the air from the outside to move into the lungs,
i.e. inspiration.
Figure 1.12 Mechanism of breathing
showing:  (a) inspiration
(b) expiration
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
27
ii.
Expiration: Release of alveolar air to the exterior is called expiration. It
is a passive process. Relaxation of the diaphragm and the external
inter-costal muscles returns the diaphragm and sternum to their normal
positions, and reduces the thoracic volume and thereby the pulmonary
volume. This leads to an increase in the  intra-pulmonary pressure to
slightly above that of the atmospheric pressure, causing the expulsion
of air from the lungs, i.e. expiration.
NOTE : The contraction of the internal intercostal muscles and the
lateral abdominal muscles help in ‘forced expiration’.
We have the ability to increase the strength of inspiration and expiration
with the help of additional muscles in the abdomen. On an average, a healthy
human breaths 12-16 times/minute. The volume of the air involved in
breathing movements, can be estimated by using a spirometer, which helps
in clinical assessment of the pulmonary functions.
1.2.4 Exchange of gases
Alveoli are the primary sites of exchange of gases in the lungs. Exchange of
gases also occurs between blood and tissues. O2 and CO2 are exchanged in
these sites by simple diffusion. The exchange of gases is based on some
important factors that can affect the rate of diffusion; these factors include
(i) partial pressure / concentration gradient of gases, (ii) solubility of the
gases, (iii) thickness of the respiratory membrane, (iv) surface area, (v)
distance of diffusion.
The pressure contributed by an individual gas in a mixture of gases is called
its partial pressure and is represented as pO2 for oxygen and pCO2 for
carbon dioxide. The data given below in the table clearly indicates a
concentration gradient for oxygen from the alveoli to the blood and from the
blood to the tissues. Similarly, a gradient present for in the opposite direction
i.e., from the tissues to the blood and from the blood to the alveoli.
Partial pressures (in mm Hg) of oxygen and carbon dioxide at different
parts involved in diffusion in comparison to those in the atmospheric air
Respiratory     Atmospheric
Alveoli
Blood
Blood
Tissues
Gas
Air
(Deoxyge-nated)
(Oxygenated)
O2
159
104
40
95
40
CO2
0.3
40
45
40
45
Zoology
28
Air
Alveolar wall
(one-celled thick)
Red blood
cell
Blood
capillary
Basement
substance
Alveolar cavity
Figure 1.13 A section of an alveolus with a
pulmonary capillary
Figure 1.14 Diagrammatic represetnation of exchange of gases at the alveolus and
the body tissues with blood and transport of O2 and CO2
As the solubility of CO2 is 20-25 times
higher than that of O2 the amount of
CO2 that can diffuse through the
diffusion
membrane
per
unit
difference in partial pressure is much
higher compared to that of O2. The
diffusion membrane is made up of
three major layers namely, the thin
squamous epithelium of the alveolar
wall, the endothelium of the alveolar
capillaries and the basement material
in between them. As  it is a very thin
border, it is   favourable for diffusion
of gases.
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
29
I.  Pulmonary gas exchange (External respiration)
Differences in pO2 and pCO2 of alveolar air and pulmonary capillaries favour
the diffusion of O2 from the alveolar air into the blood in the pulmonary
capillaries and the diffusion of CO2 in the opposite direction.
II. Systemic gas exchange (Internal respiration)
Difference in pO2and pCO2 of oxygenated blood in systemic capillaries and
tissues favour the diffusion of O2 from systemic capillaries into tissues and
the diffusion of CO2 in the opposite direction.
1.2.5 Transport of gases
Blood is the medium of transport for O2 and CO2.
I. Transport of Oxygen
Oxygen is transported from the lungs to the tissues through the plasma and
RBC of the blood.100ml of oxygenated blood can deliver 5 ml of O2 to the
tissues under normal conditions.
(i)
Transport of oxygen through plasma: About  3% of O2 is carried through
the blood plasma in a dissolved state.
(ii)
Transport of oxygen by RBC: About 97% of O2 is transported by the
RBCs in the blood. Haemoglobin is a red coloured iron containing pigment
present in the RBCs. Each haemoglobin molecule can carry a maximum
of four molecules of oxygen. Binding of oxygen with haemoglobin is
primarily related to the partial pressure of O2. At lungs, where the
partial pressure of O2 (oxygen tension) is high, oxygen binds to
haemoglobin (purplish-bluish-red in colour) in a reversible manner to
form oxyhaemoglobin (bright red in
colour). This is called oxygenation of
haemoglobin.
Hb + 4O2
Hb(O2)4
At the tissues, where the partial pressure
of O2 is low, oxyhaemoglobin dissociates
into haemoglobin and oxygen. The other
factors that influence binding of oxygen
with haemoglobin are the partial
pressure of CO2, the hydrogen ion
concentration (pH) and the temperature.
Zoology
30
(iii)
Oxygen – haemoglobin dissociation curve: It explains the relation
between percentage  saturation of haemoglobin and partial pressure of
oxygen. A sigmoid curve is obtained when percentage saturation of
haemoglobin with O2 is plotted against the pO2. This curve is called
‘oxyhaemoglobin  dissociation curve’ and is highly useful in studying
the effect of factors  such as pCO2, H+ concentration, temperature, etc.,
on the binding of O2 with haemoglobin. In the alveoli, where there is a
high pO2, low pCO2, lesser H+ concentration (high pH) and lower
temperature, the factors are all favourable for the formation of
oxyhaemoglobin. In the tissues where low pO2, high pCO2, high H+
concentration (low pH) and higher temperature exist, the conditions
are favourable for dissociation of oxygen from oxyhaemoglobin. Under
these conditions, oxygen dissociation curve shifts away from the  Y-axis
(to the right). The effect of pCO2 and H+ concentration on the oxygen
affinity of haemoglobin is called Bohr Effect (increase of carbon dioxide
in the blood and decrease in pH results in the reduction of the affinity
of hemoglobin for oxygen).
NOTE: A rise in pCO2 and fall in pH decreases the affinity of haemoglobin
for oxygen. On the other hand  a fall in pCO2 and rise in pH, increases
affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen. This clearly indicates that O2 gets
bound to haemoglobin at the lung surface and gets dissociated at the
tissues.
NOTE: At  pO2   of 100mmHg. typical in the lungs haemoglobin is saturated
to about 97%. At a pO2  of 40mm Hg  which  is common in tissues
during  rest time, haemoglobin is about 75% saturated. It means
oxyhaemoglobin gives away about 22% oxygen only to ‘resting tissues’.
It also means, only about 1/5th of the oxygen from blood is unloaded in
the resting tissues. The remaining 4/5th is in the form of ‘Reserve’ in
the blood itself. If the tissues such as skeletal muscles are involved in
vigorous exercise, there is more‘unloading tension’ in the
oxyhaemoglobin and so more oxygen is given away rapidly (up to 62% at
20mmHg.of pO2 and the  percent of saturation of haemoglobin is only
35%). As mentioned above in a ‘resting person’, haemoglobin always
carries about 70% oxygen (which is still available to tissues, for the
asking). Hence oxyhaemoglobin ensures supply of oxygen for survival
for 4-5 minutes after the stopping of heart or when breathing is
interrupted.
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
31
II. Transport of Carbon Dioxide: CO2is transported in three ways.
(i)
In dissolved state: 7 per cent of CO2 is carried in a dissolved state
(physical solution) through plasma.
CO2 + H2O

H2CO3
Do you know: Why is the PH of deoxygenated (venous) blood less than
that of oxygenated (arterial) blood.
(ii)
As carbamino compounds: About 20-25 per cent of CO2 combines
directly with free amino group of the haemoglobin and forms carbamino-
haemoglobin in a reversible manner.
Hb – NH2 + CO2

Hb – NHCOO- + H+
This binding of CO2 is related to the partial pressure of CO2.  pO2 is a
major factor which could affect this binding. When pCO2 is high and
pO2 is low as in the tissues, binding of more carbon dioxide occurs.
When pCO2 is low and pO2 is high as in the alveoli, dissociation of CO2
from carbamino – haemoglobin takes place, i.e., CO2 which is bound to
haemoglobin from the tissues is delivered at the alveoli. Carbamino
compounds are also formed by the union of CO2 with plasma proteins.
NOTE: Haemoglobin is an amphoteric compound (reacting chemically
as either an acid or a base). It  has the peculiar character of taking
more oxygen in oxygen rich areas and release CO2 and accepting more
CO2 in areas where the CO2 is more and release oxygen.
(iii)
As Bicarbonates: About 70 per cent of CO2 is transported as
bicarbonate. RBCs contain a very high concentration of the enzyme,
carbonic anhydrase and a minute quantity of the same is present in
the plasma too. This enzyme facilitates the following reaction in both
the directions.
At the tissue level, where partial pressure of CO2 is high due to catabolism,
CO2 diffuses into the blood (RBC and Plasma) and forms carbonic acid which
dissociates into HCO3
– and H+. At the alveolar site where pCO2 is low, the
reaction proceeds in the opposite direction leading to the formation of  CO2
and water. Thus CO2 is mostly trapped as bicarbonate at the tissues and
transported to the alveoli where it is released out as CO2. Every 100 mL of
deoxygenated blood delivers approximately 4mL of CO2 to the alveolar air.
Carbonic anhydrase
Carbonic anhydrase
H2CO3
3
HCO
+H+
CO2 + H2O
Zoology
32
Chloride shift: Due to the permeability
of plasma membrane of RBC to anions,
HCO3
– ions (formed due to dissociation of
H2CO3) diffuse into the blood plasma from
the RBC at the tissues. The H+ ions are
‘buffered’
(to
curtail
acidity)
by
haemoglobin which turns into HHb (acid
haemoglobin). Haemoglobin can act as
a buffer at physiological pH (7.4), because
of its high content of ‘ histidine’.
H+ + HCO3 + Hb.4O2 HHb +HCO3+ 4O2
As a result, the molecule loses its affinity
for oxygen and so O2 is released. It
diffuses into the plasma and from there
into the tissues (in the pulmonary
capillaries of the lung, where the partial
pressures and pH are reversed, all of
these reactions run in the reverse way).
To maintain electrolyte balance, Cl– ions
diffuse from plasma into RBC when the
bicorbonate ions pass out of the RBC into
plasma. This exchange of chloride and
bicarbonate ions between RBC and
plasma at the tissues is called chloride
shift or Hamburger’s phenomenon/
Hamburger’s shift. Reverse chloride shift
occurs when blood reaches the lungs.
1.2.6 Regulation of
respiratory movements
Human beings have a significant ability
to maintain and moderate the respiratory
rhythm to suit the demands of the body
tissues. This is done by the neural
system.
1.
A special centre present in the
medulla region of brain, called
‘Respiratory rhythm centre’ is
primarily responsible for this
regulation/respiratory rhythm.
Figure 1.15 Carbon dioxide
transport in the blood
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
33
2.  Another centre present
in the pons of the brain
stem  called ‘Pneumotaxic
Centre’ can moderate the
functions of the ‘respiratory
rhythm centre’. Neural
signal from this centre can
reduce the duration of
inspiration and there by
alter the respiratory rate.
3. A chemo-sensitive area
is situated adjacent to the
respiratory rhythm centre
which is highly sensitive to
CO2 and hydrogen ions.
Increase
in
these
substances can activate
this centre, which inturn
can send signals to the
respiratory rhythm centre
to
make
necessary
adjustments
in
the
respiratory process by
which these substances
can be eliminated.
4.
Receptors associated with aortic arch and carotid artery also recognize
changes in CO2 and H+ concentration and send necessary signals to the
respiratory rhythm centre and pneumo tactic centre for necessary
actions (increase in the rate and depth of breathing when their
concentration is high). The role of oxygen in the regulation of the
respiratory rhythm is quite insignificant.
1.2.7 Respiratory volumes and Capacities
Tidal Volume (T.V.): Volume of air inspired or expired during normal
inspiration or  expiration. It is approximately 500 ml. i.e., a healthy man can
inhale or exhale approximately 6000 to 8000 ml of air, per minute.
Inspiratory Reserve volume (IRV): The additional volume of air that can be
inhaled during forced breathing, in addition to the ‘tidal volume’. This is
about 2500 ml to 3000 ml.
Homeostasis
Blood pH of about 7.4
CO2 level decreases,
restoring pH to normal
Stimulus:
Rising level of CO2 in
tissues lowers blood
pH (such as when
excercising)
Response:
Signals from
medulla and
pons to rib
muscles and
diaphragm
increase rate
and depth of
ventilation
medulla detects
decrease in pH
of cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF)
Sensor/ control
centre: CSF
Medulla
oblongata
Medulla
receives
signals from
major blood
vessels
Sensors
in major
blood
vessels
detect
decrease
in pH of
blood
Carotid
arteries
Figure 1.16
Homeostatic control of breathing
Zoology
34
Expiratory reserve Volume (ERV): The additional volume of air that can be
exhaled during forced expiration, in addition to the ‘tidal volume’. This is
about 1000ml to 1100ml.
Residual volume (R.V): The volume of air remaining in the lungs even after
forcible expiration. This is about 1100 ml to 1200 ml.
By adding up a few ‘respiratory volumes’ described above, one can derive
various pulmonary capacities, which are useful in clinical diagnosis of
pulmonary disorders.
Inspiratory Capacity (IC): The total volume of air, a person can inhale  after
‘normal expiration’. This includes the  ‘tidal volume’ and ‘inspiratory reserve
volume’: IC = TV + IRV. It is about 3000 ml to 3500 ml.
Functional Residual Capacity (FRC): The volume of air that remains in the
lungs after normal expiration: FRC=ERV + RV.
Vital Capacity (VC): The maximum volume of air a person can breathe in
after ‘forced expiration’. This includes ERV, TV and IRV or the maximum
volume of air a person can breathe out after ‘forced inspiration’:
VC=TV+IRV+ERV
Total Lung Capacity (TLC): The total volume of air accommodated in the
lungs at the end of ‘forced inspiration’. This includes RV, ERV, TV and IRV
or vital capacity + residual volume: TLC=VC+RV or TLC= ERV+IRV+TV+RV
1.2.8  Disorders of the Respiratory System
1.
Asthma is a disorder of difficulty in breathing caused due to
inflammation of bronchi and bronchioles. It is characterized by the
spasm of smooth muscles present in the walls of the bronchi and
bronchioles. Symptoms include coughing, difficulty in breathing and
wheezing .In the case of asthma, the allergen causes release of histamine
and other inflammatory substances which cause constriction of the
bronchi.
2.
Emphysema is a chronic disorder in which alveolar walls are damaged
and their walls coalesce  due to which respiratory surface area of
exchange of gases  is decreased. The lung shows larger but fewer alveoli
and more fibrous and less elastic. One of the major causes of this is
‘smoking’ of tobacco.
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
35
l
l
l
l
l
Bronchitis is the inflammation of the bronchi, resulting  in the swelling
of mucous lining of bronchi,  increased mucus production and
decrease in the diameter of bronchi. Symptoms include chronic cough
with thick mucus/ sputum (phlegm).
l
l
l
l
l
Pneumonia is infection of lungs caused by bacteria such as
Streptococcus pneumoniae and also by certain viruses, fungi,
protozoans and mycoplasmas. Symptoms include inflammation of
lungs, accumulation of mucus in alveoli, and  impaired exchange of
gases , leading to death if untreated .
l
l
l
l
l
Emphysema, chronic bronchitis and asthma come under Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary diseases (COPDs).
3.  Occupational Respiratory disorders: These are caused by exposure of
the body to the harmful substances from certain industries, especially those
involving grinding or stone breaking. Long term exposure of the body to such
substances can give rise to inflammation of respiratory passage and lungs
leading to several disorders.
i.
Asbestosis: It occurs due to chronic exposure to asbestos dust in the
people working in asbestos industry.
ii.
Silicosis: It occurs because of long term exposure to ‘silica dust’ in the
people working in mining industries, quarries etc.
iii.
Siderosis: It occurs due to deposition of inhaled iron particles in tissues.
It can cause different types of siderosis such as pneumoconiosis,
hyperferremia and  hemosiderosis  (which causes recurrent alveolar
hemorrhage).
iv.
Black-lung disease: It is a lung disease that develops from inhalation
of coal dust. It is common in  long time coal mine workers.
Zoology
36
GLOSSARY
Alveoli: Thin walled, irregular,
highly vascularized bag like
structures that form the sites of
exchange of gases in the lungs.
Bohr Effect: Effect of CO2  and H+
on the oxygen-affinity of
haemoglobin.
Carbonic anhydrase: (fastest
known enzyme) An enzyme
present in RBC, that catalyses
the formation of carbonic acid
from  CO2  and H2O its
dissociation into H+ and HCO3
-.
Chemo-sensitive area: It is an area
situated adjacent to the
respiratory rhythm centre; it is
highly sensitive to CO2 and H+.
Chloride shift: Exchange of
chloride and bicarbonate ions
between erythrocytes and
plasma. It is also called
Hamburger’s phenomenon.
Cricoid cartilage: Circular
cartilage that forms the lower
and  posterior part of wall of
larynx.
Glottis: It is an opening of the
larynx into the pharynx.
Inter costal muscles: Muscles that
extend in between ribs and help in
bringing breathing movements.
Pneumotaxic centre: It is present in
the pons region of brain and can
moderate the functions of
respiratory rhythm centre.
Pulmonary exchange: Exchange of
O2 and CO2 between pulmonary
capillaries and alveoli of lungs.
Respiratory rhythm centre: A
specialized centre present in the
medulla
region,
primarily
responsible for regulation of
respiration.
Systemic exchange: Exchange of O2
and CO2 between systemic
capillaries and tissues.
Thyroid cartilage: The largest
cartilage that supports the ventral
and lateral walls of the larynx.
Vocal cords: A pair of thin strands
of yellow elastic fibres that extend
between thyroid and arytenoids
cartilages. They help in the
production of sound.
Human Anatomy and
Physiology - I
37
QUESTIONS
Very Short Answer Type
Questions
1.
Define vital capacity. What is its
significance.
2.
What is  the volume of air
remaining in lungs after a
normal expiration?
3.
Diffusion of oxygen occurs in
the alveolar region only and not
in the  other parts of respiratory
system. How do you justify the
statement?
4.
What is the effect of pCO2 on
oxygen transport?
5.
What
happens
to
the
respiratory process in a man
going up a hill?
6.
What is Tidal volume? Find out
the Tidal volume (approximate
value) in a healthy human, in
an hour.
7.
Define
oxyhaemoglobin
dissociation curve. Can you
suggest any reason for its
sigmoidal pattern?
8.
What are conchae?
9.
What is meant by chloride shift?
10.
Mention any two occupational
respiratory disorders and their
causes in human beings.
11.
Name the muscles that help in
normal breathing movements.
12.
Draw a diagram of oxy-
haemoglobin  dissociation
curve.
1.
Explain the process of
inspiration and expiration
under normal conditions.
2.
What are the major transport
mechanisms
for
CO 2?
Explain.
3.
How is respiratory movements
regulated in man?
4.
Distinguish between
(a)
IRV and ERV
(b)
Inspiratory capacity
and expiratory capacity
(c)
Vital capacity and Total
lung capacity.
5.
Describe
disorders
of
respiratory system.
1.
Describe the respiratory
system in man.
2.
Write an essay on the
transport of oxygen and
carbon dioxide by blood.
Short Answer Type Questions
Long Answer Type Questions
Very Short Answer Type
Questions